[Docs][8/N] KV Offloader Doc (#1144)
llm-d/llm-d: docs/wip-docs-new/architecture/advanced/kv-offloader.md

# KV-Cache Offloading

> KV-Cache offloading extends the effective cache capacity beyond GPU HBM by moving KV blocks to lower-cost tiers like CPU DRAM and storage. llm-d uses the vLLM Offloading Connector, which supports two offloading backends: CPU RAM (part of vLLM) and shared filesystem storage (via the llm-d FS backend, part of llm-d-kv-cache). These currently operate as independent options—tiered offloading where blocks flow through multiple levels is under active development. [Other connectors](#other-connectors) like LMCache are also supported through vLLM/SGLang integration.

Reviewer: The paragraph is not clear on what is currently supported and what is under development. I don't think we should be documenting anything here that is not currently deployable. If we want to list under development stuff, then pls add a roadmap section at the end of the doc. 

Also, I think the paragraph should be clear on what is vllm specific and what is model server agnostic.

Author: Improved

> > KV-Cache offloading complements the [KV-Cache Indexer](./kv-indexer.md) which handles cache-aware routing. While the indexer determines *where* cached blocks exist, the offloader manages *how* blocks move between GPU memory and lower-cost tiers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> KV-Cache offloading complements the [KV-Cache Indexer](./kv-indexer.md) which handles cache-aware routing. While the indexer determines *where* cached blocks exist, the offloader manages *how* blocks move between GPU memory and lower-cost tiers.
```

## Functionality

Transformer inference computes Key and Value tensors during prefill, then reuses them during decode. For long contexts or repeated prefixes (system prompts, agentic loops, multi-turn conversations), recomputing these tensors wastes significant GPU cycles. KV-Cache offloading addresses two scaling limitations:

1. **Capacity** — GPU HBM is limited (tens of GB per GPU). CPU RAM adds another order of magnitude, but storage can scale nearly infinitely.

2. **Sharing** — Local caches are isolated per vLLM instance. Shared storage enables cross-node cache reuse, faster scale-up for new replicas, and persistence across pod restarts.

The offloading system operates asynchronously. Writes to lower tiers happen in the background without blocking inference. Reads from storage still require waiting, but loading cached blocks is typically faster than recomputing them—up to 16x faster for long prompts.

## Offloading Architecture

llm-d supports two offloading targets. Each extends cache capacity beyond GPU HBM with different tradeoffs:

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐

> │                            vLLM                                 │

Reviewer: The architecture diagram should be model server agnostic, if the vllm stack is different from sglang or trt, and it is hard to show what is vllm-specific and what is not in this diagram, then I suggest to have different subsections, one for vllm and one for others.

Author: Added an out-of-tree section below and reflected better throughout the doc. Included TensorRT although we don't formally support it in guides yet, but conceptually things are the same. cc @robertgshaw2-redhat

│  ┌─────────┐   ┌──────────┐   │  ┌─────────┐   ┌─────────────┐  │
│  │ Manager │   │  Worker  │   │  │ Manager │   │   Worker    │  │
│  │         │   │          │   │  │         │   │             │  │
│  │ ┌─────┐ │   │┌────────┐│   │  │┌───────┐│   │┌───────────┐│  │
│  │ │ LRU │ │   ││Transfer││   │  ││Lookup ││   ││Thread-Pool││  │
│  │ └─────┘ │   ││GPU-CPU ││   │  │└───────┘│   │├───────────┤│  │
│  │         │   │└────────┘│   │  │         │   ││Transfer   ││  │
│  │         │   │          │   │  │         │   ││GPU-CPU    ││  │
│  │         │   │          │   │  │         │   │├───────────┤│  │
│  │         │   │          │   │  │         │   ││POSIX API  ││  │
│  │         │   │          │   │  │         │   │└───────────┘│  │
│  └─────────┘   └──────────┘   │  └─────────┘   └─────────────┘  │
└───────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────────┘
```

| Target | Latency | Capacity | Scope | Best For |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| CPU RAM | Low | ~250GB/GPU | Per-node | High-frequency reuse, preemption recovery |
| Shared Storage | Higher | TB+ | Cross-cluster | Cross-node sharing, persistence, massive scale |

> > **Future work:** Tiered offloading—where blocks flow GPU → CPU → Storage as a unified hierarchy—is under active development. Today, choose one offloading backend based on your workload requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> **Future work:** Tiered offloading—where blocks flow GPU → CPU → Storage as a unified hierarchy—is under active development. Today, choose one offloading backend based on your workload requirements.
```

Author: Lost this throughout the iterations but recovered with the proper format.

## Components

### vLLM Native CPU Offloading

vLLM's `OffloadingConnector` manages the GPU-to-CPU tier. It uses a hardware DMA engine for high-throughput transfers with minimal GPU core interference. The connector:

- Allocates pinned CPU memory for staging buffers
- Transfers KV blocks asynchronously using GPU DMA, avoiding interference with GPU compute cores.
- Uses a contiguous memory layout (introduced in vLLM 0.12.0) that groups all layers into single physical blocks, improving transfer throughput by 4-5x

> CPU offloading requires no external infrastructure. Enable it with:

Reviewer: clarify that this is a vllm flag

Author: Should be clearer now.

# KV-Cache Offloading

> KV-Cache offloading extends the effective cache capacity beyond GPU HBM by moving KV blocks to lower-cost storage. llm-d supports two offloading backends: CPU RAM (via vLLM's native OffloadingConnector) and shared filesystem storage (via the llm-d FS backend). These currently operate as independent options—tiered offloading where blocks flow through multiple levels is under active development. [Other connectors](#other-connectors) like LMCache are also supported through vLLM/SGLang integration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
KV-Cache offloading extends the effective cache capacity beyond GPU HBM by moving KV blocks to lower-cost tiers like CPU DRAM and storage. llm-d uses the vLLM Offloading Connector, which supports two offloading backends: CPU RAM (part of vLLM) and shared filesystem storage (via the llm-d FS backend, part of llm-d-kv-cache). These currently operate as independent options—tiered offloading where blocks flow through multiple levels is under active development. [Other connectors](#other-connectors) like LMCache are also supported through vLLM/SGLang integration.
```

> > KV-Cache offloading complements the [KV-Cache Indexer](./kv-indexer.md) which handles cache-aware routing. While the indexer determines *where* cached blocks exist, the offloader manages *how* blocks move between GPU memory and offload targets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> KV-Cache offloading complements the [KV-Cache Indexer](./kv-indexer.md) which handles cache-aware routing. While the indexer determines *where* cached blocks exist, the offloader manages *how* blocks move between GPU memory and lower-cost tiers.
```

## Functionality

Transformer inference computes Key and Value tensors during prefill, then reuses them during decode. For long contexts or repeated prefixes (system prompts, agentic loops, multi-turn conversations), recomputing these tensors wastes significant GPU cycles. KV-Cache offloading addresses two scaling limitations:

1. **Capacity** — GPU HBM is limited (tens of GB per GPU). CPU RAM adds another order of magnitude, but storage can scale nearly infinitely.

2. **Sharing** — Local caches are isolated per vLLM instance. Shared storage enables cross-node cache reuse, faster scale-up for new replicas, and persistence across pod restarts.

The offloading system operates asynchronously. Writes to lower tiers happen in the background without blocking inference. Reads from storage still require waiting, but loading cached blocks is typically faster than recomputing them—up to 16x faster for long prompts.

## Offloading Architecture

llm-d supports two offloading targets. Each extends cache capacity beyond GPU HBM with different tradeoffs:

> 

Reviewer 2: I think is better to Reuse the VLLM image of the offloading connector with two backends and put it as an asset

Author: Done.

```
                                    ┌─────────────────────────────────────┐
                                    │            vLLM Engine              │
                                    │           (GPU HBM Cache)           │
                                    └──────────────────┬──────────────────┘
                                                       │
                          ┌────────────────────────────┴────────────────────────────┐
                          │                                                         │
                          ▼                                                         ▼
               ┌─────────────────────┐                               ┌─────────────────────┐
               │      CPU RAM        │                               │   Shared Storage    │
               │                     │                               │                     │
               │  vLLM Native        │                               │  llm-d FS Backend   │
               │  OffloadingConnector│                               │                     │
               │                     │                               │  ┌───────────────┐  │

>                │  • No extra infra   │                               │  │  PVC Evictor  │  │

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should put too many details about the PVC evictor, just mention, like the guide, a " Note: The storage connector does not handle cleanup or eviction of data on shared storage. Storage capacity management must be handled by the underlying storage system or by an external controller. A simple reference implementation of a PVC-based evictor is available in the kv-cache repository (PVC Evictor), which can be used to automatically clean up old KV-cache files when storage usage thresholds are exceeded.

Reviewer 3: agree

Author: Done.

                                                                     │  • Cross-node       │
                                                                     │  • TB+ capacity     │
                                                                     │  • Persistent       │
                                                                     └─────────────────────┘
```

| Target | Latency | Capacity | Scope | Best For |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| CPU RAM | Low | ~250GB/GPU | Per-node | High-frequency reuse, preemption recovery |
| Shared Storage | Higher | TB+ | Cross-cluster | Cross-node sharing, persistence, massive scale |

> **Future work:** Tiered offloading—where blocks flow GPU → CPU → Storage as a unified hierarchy—is under active development. Today, choose one offloading backend based on your workload requirements, or combine them using the vLLM MultiConnector.

## Components

### vLLM Native CPU Offloading

vLLM's `OffloadingConnector` manages the GPU-to-CPU tier. It uses a hardware DMA engine for high-throughput transfers with minimal GPU core interference. The connector:

- Allocates pinned CPU memory for staging buffers

> - Transfers KV blocks asynchronously using `cudaMemcpyAsync`

Reviewer 2: This command changed so 
```suggestion
-Transfers KV blocks asynchronously using GPU DMA, avoiding interference with GPU compute cores.
```

- Uses a contiguous memory layout (introduced in vLLM 0.12.0) that groups all layers into single physical blocks, improving transfer throughput by 4-5x

CPU offloading requires no external infrastructure. Enable it with:

```bash
--kv_offloading_backend native --kv_offloading_size <size_in_GB>
```

### llm-d Filesystem Connector

> 

Reviewer 2: I think you can reuse this part from the blog [What We Built: llm-d FS Backend](https://llm-d.ai/blog/native-kv-cache-offloading-to-any-file-system-with-llm-d#what-we-built-llm-d-fs-backend) for the next parts, and if you want can reuse the image that explains the threadpool

Author: Done.

**Content-Addressed Files** — Block hashes determine file paths using a two-level directory structure that limits fan-out:

```
<root>/<model>/<config>/<rank>/<dtype>/<hhh>/<hh>/<hash>.bin

Example:
/mnt/kv-cache/Qwen3-32B/block_size_16_blocks_per_file_16/tp_2_pp_size_1_pcp_size_1/rank_0/bfloat16/a3f/42/a3f42e8b1c9d7a6f.bin
```

**Atomic Writes** — The C++ engine writes to a temp file then renames, preventing partial reads.

**Read-Preferring Priority** — Worker threads prioritize reads over writes (default 75% read bias) since reads are latency-sensitive while writes can be deferred.

#### Data Path

The connector uses a high-performance C++ engine (`storage_offload.so`) with:

- Thread-local pinned staging buffers for GPU↔CPU transfers
- NUMA-aware thread pool for parallel I/O
- GPU DMA by default, with optional GPU-kernel-based copying via `USE_KERNEL_COPY_READ`/`USE_KERNEL_COPY_WRITE`
- Optional GPUDirect Storage (GDS) for direct GPU↔disk transfers

```
GPU Block ──▶ [DMA] ──▶ Pinned CPU Buffer ──▶ [I/O Thread] ──▶ Filesystem
              async        per-thread              parallel
```

> ### PVC Evictor

Reviewer 2: I think we can remove this part

Author: Done.

llm-d works with any KV-cache connector compatible with vLLM or SGLang. Beyond the native and filesystem backends described above, [LMCache](https://lmcache.ai) provides an alternative with support for multiple storage backends and its own caching strategies.

All connectors integrate with llm-d's scheduling layer through **KV-Events**—cache mutation notifications that the [KV-Cache Indexer](./kv-indexer.md) consumes to maintain a global view of cache distribution. This enables prefix-aware routing regardless of which offloading backend is in use.

For deployment guides covering LMCache and other connector options, see the [Tiered Prefix Cache Guide](https://github.com/llm-d/llm-d/tree/main/guides/tiered-prefix-cache).

## Configuration

### CPU Offloading (vLLM Native)

| Field | Type | Default | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `kv_offloading_backend` | string | - | Set to `native` to enable CPU offloading |
| `kv_offloading_size` | integer | - | CPU cache size in GB |

Or via `--kv-transfer-config`:

```json
{
  "kv_connector": "OffloadingConnector",
  "kv_role": "kv_both",
  "kv_connector_extra_config": {
    "num_cpu_blocks": 10000
  }
}
```

> ### Storage Offloading (llm-d FS Backend)

Reviewer 2: I think at a high level we don't want to include all the configuration details, just the main ones, and reference the README for the rest. This way, we don't need to update the doc on every flag change.

Author: Done.

      "kv_connector_extra_config": {
        "spec_name": "SharedStorageOffloadingSpec",
        "spec_module_path": "llmd_fs_backend.spec",
        "shared_storage_path": "/mnt/kv-cache/",
        "block_size": 256,
        "threads_per_gpu": 64
      }
    }
volumeMounts:
  - name: kv-cache
    mountPath: /mnt/kv-cache
```

### Tiered Offloading (CPU + Storage)

> **Coming soon:** Combined CPU + Storage tiering is under development. Track progress at [llm-d/llm-d#682](https://github.com/llm-d/llm-d/issues/682).

### PVC Evictor Deployment

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: kv-cache-evictor
spec:
  replicas: 1
  template:
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: evictor
          image: ghcr.io/llm-d/pvc-evictor:latest
          env:
            - name: CACHE_DIR
              value: "/kv-cache"
            - name: CLEANUP_THRESHOLD
              value: "0.85"
            - name: TARGET_THRESHOLD
              value: "0.70"
          volumeMounts:
            - name: kv-cache
              mountPath: /kv-cache
      volumes:
        - name: kv-cache
          persistentVolumeClaim:
            claimName: kv-cache-pvc
```

> ## Metrics

Reviewer 2: I think it's better to point to a README in case we add more metrics

Author: Done.

The FS backend populates vLLM's built-in offloading metrics:

| Metric | Type | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `vllm:kv_offload_total_bytes` | Counter | Total bytes transferred, labeled by `transfer_type` |
| `vllm:kv_offload_total_time` | Counter | Total transfer time in seconds, labeled by `transfer_type` |
| `vllm:kv_offload_size` | Histogram | Distribution of transfer sizes in bytes |

**Labels:**
- `GPU_to_SHARED_STORAGE` — writes to storage
- `SHARED_STORAGE_to_GPU` — reads from storage

## Performance Considerations

> **When to use CPU offloading:** Best for workloads with high cache reuse that fit within node-local memory. Low operational overhead, no external dependencies, and the lowest offload latency. Also helps recover preempted requests without recomputation.

Reviewer 2: Personally, I think CPU offloading should always be enabled. I don't see a reason why not. What do you think @orozery and @dannyharnik

Reviewer 3: Yes, as long as there is a minimal amount of available CPU. 
Maybe state that best to use whenever available CPU DRAM is larger than GPU HBM space.

Author: Done.

> **When to use storage offloading:** Best when cache working set exceeds single-node capacity, when cross-node sharing is valuable (repeated system prompts across replicas, agentic workflows), or when persistence across restarts matters.

Reviewer 2: Also worth mentioning is that storage offloading is most effective when the storage network is fast enough to allow low-latency loads and stores.

**Storage selection:** The FS backend works with any POSIX filesystem. Performance varies by backend:
- Local NVMe: Lowest latency, no sharing
- CephFS: Good balance of performance and sharing
- IBM Storage Scale, GCP Lustre: High throughput for large deployments

> **Block size tuning:** Larger `block_size` values (256-512 tokens) improve I/O efficiency but increase minimum cache granularity. Match to your typical prefix lengths.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Block size tuning:** Larger `block_size` values (256-512 tokens) improve I/O efficiency but require longer matching prefixes for a cache hit. Match to your typical prefix lengths.
```
